# Changepoint Detection Literature

## Fundamentals and Applications
* [Masashi Sugiyama Software (R, Matlab, and Pyton - a bit outdated)](http://www.ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp/sugi/software.html)

## Computer Implementation
* [sdt-python: Changepoint detection](https://schuetzgroup.github.io/sdt-python/changepoint.html)  
  Implements PELT (offline), Fear 2006 (offline), Adam 2007 (online).
* [BEAST: A Bayesian Ensemble Algorithm for Change-Point Detection and Time Series Decomposition](https://github.com/zhaokg/Rbeast)  
  BEAST (Bayesian Estimator of Abrupt change, Seasonality, and Trend) is a fast, generic Bayesian model averaging algorithm to decompose time series or 1D sequential data into individual components, such as abrupt changes, trends, and periodic/seasonal variations, as described in Zhao et al. (2019). BEAST is useful for changepoint detection (e.g., breakpoints, structural breaks, regime shifts, or anomalies), trend analysis, time series decomposition (e.g., trend vs seasonality), time series segmentation, and interrupted time series analysis.
* [Github Repositories Changepoint](https://github.com/topics/changepoint)
* [Changepoint detector by density ratio](https://github.com/daisuke-motoki/change_point_detector)
* [Change-Point Detection in Time-Series Data by Relative Density-Ratio Estimation - Matlab](https://github.com/anewgithubname/change_detection)
* [Papers with Code - Changepoint](https://paperswithcode.com/task/change-point-detection)
* [Nonparametric multiple changepoint detection for multivariate data](https://github.com/chdhr-harshal/nonparametric-changepoint-detection/tree/master)
* [Kats - time series analysis in Python](https://facebookresearch.github.io/Kats/)  
  Facebook time series analysis package - it includes the Bayesian Online Changepoint Detection algorithm of Adams and McKay (2007).

## Online Changepoint Detection
* [Online Neural Networks for Change Point Detection](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.01388v1.pdf)  
  Moments when a time series changes its behaviour are called change points. Detection of such points is a well-known problem, which can be found in many applications: quality monitoring of industrial processes, failure detection in complex systems, health monitoring, speech recognition and video analysis. Occurrence of change point implies that the state of the system is altered and its
timely detection might help to prevent unwanted consequences. In this paper, we present two online change-point detection approaches based on neural
networks. These algorithms demonstrate linear computational complexity and are suitable for change-point detection in large time series. We compare them
with the best known algorithms on various synthetic and real world data sets. Experiments show that the proposed methods outperform known approaches.
* [BOCD Bayesian Online Changepoint Detection in Python (Adams-MacKay)](https://pypi.org/project/bocd/)[arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/0710.3742)  
  Changepoints are abrupt variations in the generative parameters of a data sequence. Online detection of changepoints is useful in modelling and prediction of time series in application areas such as finance, biometrics, and robotics. While frequentist methods have yielded online filtering and prediction techniques, most Bayesian papers have focused on the retrospective segmentation problem. Here we examine the case where the model parameters before and after the changepoint are independent and we derive an online algorithm for exact inference of the most recent changepoint. We compute the probability distribution of the length of the current ``run,'' or time since the last changepoint, using a simple message-passing algorithm. Our implementation is highly modular so that the algorithm may be applied to a variety of types of data. We illustrate this modularity by demonstrating the algorithm on three different real-world data sets
* [Bayesian Online Prediction of Change Points](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/bayesian-online-detection-and-prediction-of)  
Online detection of instantaneous changes in the generative process of a data sequence generally focuses on retrospective inference of such change points without considering their future occurrences. We extend the Bayesian Online Change Point Detection algorithm to also infer the number of time steps until the next change point (i.e., the residual time). This enables to handle observation models which depend on the total segment duration, which is useful to model data sequences with temporal scaling. The resulting inference algorithm for segment detection can be deployed in an online fashion, and we illustrate applications to synthetic and to two medical real-world data sets.
* [Detecting and Adapting to Irregular Distribution Shifts in Bayesian Online Learning](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/variational-beam-search-for-online-learning)  
  We consider the problem of online learning in the presence of distribution shifts that occur at an unknown rate and of unknown intensity. We derive a new Bayesian online inference approach to simultaneously infer these distribution shifts and adapt the model to the detected changes by integrating ideas from change point detection, switching dynamical systems, and Bayesian online learning. Using a binary 'change variable,' we construct an informative prior such that--if a change is detected--the model partially erases the information of past model updates by tempering to facilitate adaptation to the new data distribution. Furthermore, the approach uses beam search to track multiple change-point hypotheses and selects the most probable one in hindsight. Our proposed method is model-agnostic, applicable in both supervised and unsupervised learning settings, suitable for an environment of concept drifts or covariate drifts, and yields improvements over state-of-the-art Bayesian online learning approaches.  
* [Detecting Change Intervals with Isolation Distributional Kernel](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/detecting-change-intervals-with-isolation)  
  Detecting abrupt changes in data distribution is one of the most significant tasks in streaming data analysis. Although many unsupervised Change-Point Detection (CPD) methods have been proposed recently to identify those changes, they still suffer from missing subtle changes, poor scalability, or/and sensitive to noise points. To meet these challenges, we are the first to generalise the CPD problem as a special case of the Change-Interval Detection (CID) problem. Then we propose a CID method, named iCID, based on a recent Isolation Distributional Kernel (IDK). iCID identifies the change interval if there is a high dissimilarity score between two non-homogeneous temporal adjacent intervals. The data-dependent property and finite feature map of IDK enabled iCID to efficiently identify various types of change points in data streams with the tolerance of noise points. Moreover, the proposed online and offline versions of iCID have the ability to optimise key parameter settings. The effectiveness and efficiency of iCID have been systematically verified on both synthetic and real-world datasets.
* [https://paperswithcode.com/paper/variational-beam-search-for-online-learning](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/variational-beam-search-for-online-learning)  
  We consider the problem of online learning in the presence of distribution shifts that occur at an unknown rate and of unknown intensity. We derive a new Bayesian online inference approach to simultaneously infer these distribution shifts and adapt the model to the detected changes by integrating ideas from change point detection, switching dynamical systems, and Bayesian online learning. Using a binary 'change variable,' we construct an informative prior such that--if a change is detected--the model partially erases the information of past model updates by tempering to facilitate adaptation to the new data distribution. Furthermore, the approach uses beam search to track multiple change-point hypotheses and selects the most probable one in hindsight. Our proposed method is model-agnostic, applicable in both supervised and unsupervised learning settings, suitable for an environment of concept drifts or covariate drifts, and yields improvements over state-of-the-art Bayesian online learning approaches.
* [Restarted Bayesian Online Change-point Detector achieves Optimal Detection Delay](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/restarted-bayesian-online-change-point)  
  In this paper, we consider the problem of sequential change-point detection where both the change-points and the distributions before and after the change are assumed to be unknown. For this key problem in statistical and sequential learning theory, we derive a variant of the Bayesian Online Change Point Detector proposed by \cite{adams2007bayesian} which is easier to analyze than the original version while keeping its powerful message-passing algorithm. We provide a non-asymptotic analysis of the false-alarm rate and the detection delay that matches the existing lower-bound. We further provide the first explicit high-probability control of the detection delay for such approach. Experiments on synthetic and real-world data show that this proposal compares favorably with the state-of-art change-point detection strategy, namely the Improved Generalized Likelihood Ratio (Improved GLR) while outperforming the original Bayesian Online Change Point Detection strategy.
* [A Contrastive Approach to Online Change Point Detection](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/a-contrastive-approach-to-online-change-point)
  We suggest a novel procedure for online change point detection. Our approach expands an idea of maximizing a discrepancy measure between points from pre-change and post-change distributions. This leads to a flexible procedure suitable for both parametric and nonparametric scenarios. We prove non-asymptotic bounds on the average running length of the procedure and its expected detection delay. The efficiency of the algorithm is illustrated with numerical experiments on synthetic and real-world data sets.
* [Online Kernel CUSUM for Change-Point Detection](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/online-kernel-cusum-for-change-point)
  We propose an efficient online kernel Cumulative Sum (CUSUM) method for change-point detection that utilizes the maximum over a set of kernel statistics to account for the unknown change-point location. Our approach exhibits increased sensitivity to small changes compared to existing methods, such as the Scan-B statistic, which corresponds to a non-parametric Shewhart chart-type procedure. We provide accurate analytic approximations for two key performance metrics: the Average Run Length (ARL) and Expected Detection Delay (EDD), which enable us to establish an optimal window length on the order of the logarithm of ARL to ensure minimal power loss relative to an oracle procedure with infinite memory. Such a finding parallels the classic result for window-limited Generalized Likelihood Ratio (GLR) procedure in parametric change-point detection literature. Moreover, we introduce a recursive calculation procedure for detection statistics to ensure constant computational and memory complexity, which is essential for online procedures. Through extensive experiments on simulated data and a real-world human activity dataset, we demonstrate the competitive performance of our method and validate our theoretical results.
* [Bayesian Online Change Point Detection for Baseline Shifts](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/bayesian-online-change-point-detection-for)
  In time series data analysis, detecting change points on a real-time basis (online) is of great interest in many areas, such as finance, environmental monitoring, and medicine. One promising means to achieve this is the Bayesian online change point detection (BOCPD) algorithm, which has been successfully adopted in particular cases in which the time series of interest has a fixed baseline. However, we have found that the algorithm struggles when the baseline irreversibly shifts from its initial state. This is because with the original BOCPD algorithm, the sensitivity with which a change point can be detected is degraded if the data points are fluctuating at locations relatively far from the original baseline. In this paper, we not only extend the original BOCPD algorithm to be applicable to a time series whose baseline is constantly shifting toward unknown values but also visualize why the proposed extension works. To demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed algorithm compared to the original one, we examine these algorithms on two real-world data sets and six synthetic data sets.
* [PERCEPT: a new online change-point detection method using topological data analysis](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/percept-a-new-online-change-point-detection)
  Topological data analysis (TDA) provides a set of data analysis tools for extracting embedded topological structures from complex high-dimensional datasets. In recent years, TDA has been a rapidly growing field which has found success in a wide range of applications, including signal processing, neuroscience and network analysis. In these applications, the online detection of changes is of crucial importance, but this can be highly challenging since such changes often occur in a low-dimensional embedding within high-dimensional data streams. We thus propose a new method, called PERsistence diagram-based ChangE-PoinT detection (PERCEPT), which leverages the learned topological structure from TDA to sequentially detect changes. PERCEPT follows two key steps: it first learns the embedded topology as a point cloud via persistence diagrams, then applies a non-parametric monitoring approach for detecting changes in the resulting point cloud distributions. This yields a non-parametric, topology-aware framework which can efficiently detect online changes from high-dimensional data streams. We investigate the effectiveness of PERCEPT over existing methods in a suite of numerical experiments where the data streams have an embedded topological structure. We then demonstrate the usefulness of PERCEPT in two applications in solar flare monitoring and human gesture detection.
* [ALACPD: Unsupervised Online Memory-free Change-point Detection using an Ensemble of LSTM-Autoencoder-based Neural Networks](https://womencourage.acm.org/2021/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/65_extendedabstract.pdf) [GitHub](https://github.com/zahraatashgahi/ALACPD)
  Change-point detection (CPD) is recognized as being one of the most significant tasks in time series analysis. While offline CPD has been vastly investigated in the last few years, online CPD still suffers from major challenges, such as high dependency on the choice of hyperparameters and prior information about data. However, in most real-world applications, very little prior information about the data is available, and performing hyperparameter tuning might not
be feasible. Our proposed method, Adaptive LSTM-Autoencoder Change-point Detection (ALACPD), aims to address these challenges by performing unsupervised online memory-free CPD and continuously adapting itself to the current behavior of the system.
